---
layout: post
title:  "The Autobiography of Malcolm X"
permalink: /malcolm-x/
date:   2019-08-25
categories: books
---

As part of studying the best autobiographies, I've listened to [Malcolm X - The Autobiography of Malcolm X](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_rYcbiF5Tt8&t=29092s) with an introduction by M.S. Handler.

I'm a little over halfway through, and wow, it's an intense story. I like this better than the [Benjamin Franklin's biography](/benjamin-franklin/), but Malcolm had an advantage being able to revise.

---
### [Early years from Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Malcolm_X)
Malcolm Little was born May 19, 1925, in Omaha, Nebraska, the fourth of seven children of Grenada-born Louise Helen Little (née Norton) and Georgia-born Earl Little.[2] Earl was an outspoken Baptist lay speaker, and he and Louise were admirers of Pan-African activist Marcus Garvey. Earl was a local leader of the Universal Negro Improvement Association (UNIA) and Louise served as secretary and "branch reporter", sending news of local UNIA activities to Negro World; they inculcated self-reliance and black pride in their children.[3][4][5] Malcolm X later said that white violence killed four of his father's brothers.[6]

Because of Ku Klux Klan threats‍—‌Earl's UNIA activities were said to be "spreading trouble"[7]‍—‌the family relocated in 1926 to Milwaukee, Wisconsin, and shortly thereafter to Lansing, Michigan.[8] There the family was frequently harassed by the Black Legion, a white racist group. When the family home burned in 1929, Earl accused the Black Legion.[9]

When Malcolm was six, his father died in what was officially ruled a streetcar accident, though his mother Louise believed Earl had been murdered by the Black Legion. Rumors that white racists were responsible for his father's death were widely circulated and were very disturbing to Malcolm X as a child. As an adult, he expressed conflicting beliefs on the question.[10] After a dispute with creditors, Louise received a life insurance benefit (nominally $1,000‍—‌about $16,000 in 2018 dollars[B]) in payments of $18 per month;[11] the issuer of another, larger policy refused to pay, claiming her husband Earl had committed suicide.[12] To make ends meet Louise rented out part of her garden, and her sons hunted game.[13]

In 1937 a man Louise had been dating‍—‌marriage had seemed a possibility‍—‌vanished from her life when she became pregnant with his child.[14] In late 1938 she had a nervous breakdown and was committed to Kalamazoo State Hospital. The children were separated and sent to foster homes. Malcolm and his siblings secured her release 24 years later.[15][16]

Malcolm Little excelled in junior high school but dropped out after a white teacher told him that practicing law, his aspiration at the time, was "no realistic goal for a nigger".[17] Later Malcolm X recalled feeling that the white world offered no place for a career-oriented black man, regardless of talent.[17]

From age 14 to 21, Little held a variety of jobs while living with his half-sister Ella Little-Collins in Roxbury, a largely African-American neighborhood of Boston.[18][19]

After a short time in Flint, Michigan, he moved to New York City's Harlem neighborhood in 1943, where he engaged in drug dealing, gambling, racketeering, robbery, and pimping.[20] According to recent biographies, Little also occasionally had sex with other men, usually for money.[21][22][C] He befriended John Elroy Sanford, a fellow dishwasher at Jimmy's Chicken Shack in Harlem who aspired to be a professional comedian. Both men had reddish hair, so Sanford was called "Chicago Red" after his hometown and Little was known as "Detroit Red". Years later, Sanford became famous as Redd Foxx.[30]

Summoned by the local draft board for military service in World War II, he feigned mental disturbance by rambling and declaring: "I want to be sent down South. Organize them nigger soldiers ... steal us some guns, and kill us [some] crackers".[31][32][33] He was declared "mentally disqualified for military service".[31][32][33]

In late 1945, Little returned to Boston, where he and four accomplices committed a series of burglaries targeting wealthy white families.[34] In 1946, he was arrested while picking up a stolen watch he had left at a shop for repairs,[35] and in February began serving an eight-to-ten-year sentence at Charlestown State Prison for larceny and breaking and entering.[36]

---

His dad used to hit his brothers, but not him because he was more light-skinned. Conversely, his mother would be harsh with him because he was lighter. His mom married his father partly because he was dark. She was light skinned, but didn't like this about herself. His mother had her nervous breakdown, but Malcolm sees the cause coming from multiple factors. Not having money from the life insurance and not being able to stay consistent with a job due to racism caused instability. With all the children around, white social workers were checking in on their house monthly then weekly. This further caused his mother distress. She broke down so bad when Malcolm went to see her, she didn't recognize him. In foster care, he did well and was well liked. The people he stayed with would talk openly about their feelings towards _N-words_ and negroes in front of Malcolm as if he wasn't there. He reported hearing how they didn't always intend any harm by their racist views, that's just how they honestly felt. They believed black people were less capable and full of vices. His teachers tried to wear him down. When he was 17, he left for New York and got into trouble. He was selling dope and doing all kinds of shady things in a night club as a waiter. Hustling was the only life that offered opportunities for him. He made money and got into drugs, taking heavy stuff to numb himself. Part of his hustle was connecting white people with what they wanted, drugs or anything else. Part of what whites wanted was to sexualize and fetishize black bodies. A creepy story: a white girl was told black men were extremely sexual. This seed got in her mind along with the taboo of it. She threatened one of the black men working at her house, if he didn't take her virginity, she would say he raped her. This is extortion-rape! The guy did what she asked and quit the job. That's so sad. She would share this story casually, but she was in a tangled position. Whites would also go looking for black culture as a taboo and entertainment.

I relate in a lot of ways to Malcolm. His unstable childhood, going through foster care, in some ways being held back intellectually. A part of why he writes his autobiography is because he believes to know a person you must know the whole of them, not just one part. We diverge a lot in criminal activity. He began to burglarize homes with the help of his black male friend and two white women. The white women were in prostitution, and they scouted their john's for places to hit. When Malcolm and his accomplices are caught, the white women are given light sentences, and he's given 10 years in prison. He felt the police and jury were the most incensed about two black men hanging around and corrupting two white women, not the burglarizing. The cops asked the two men all kinds of questions about their relationships to the white girls.

---

"**Prison**

When Little was in prison, he met fellow convict John Bembry,[38] a self-educated man he would later describe as "the first man I had ever seen command total respect ... with words".[39] Under Bembry's influence, Little developed a voracious appetite for reading.[40]

At this time, several of his siblings wrote to him about the Nation of Islam, a relatively new religious movement preaching black self-reliance and, ultimately, the return of the African diaspora to Africa, where they would be free from white American and European domination.[41] He showed scant interest at first, but after his brother Reginald wrote in 1948, "Malcolm, don't eat any more pork and don't smoke any more cigarettes. I'll show you how to get out of prison",[42] he quit smoking and began to refuse pork.[43] After a visit in which Reginald described the group's teachings, including the belief that white people are devils, Little concluded that every relationship he'd had with whites had been tainted by dishonesty, injustice, greed, and hatred.[44] Little, whose hostility to religion had earned him the prison nickname "Satan",[45] became receptive to the message of the Nation of Islam.[46]

In late 1948, Little wrote to Elijah Muhammad, the leader of the Nation of Islam. Muhammad advised him to renounce his past, humbly bow in prayer to God, and promise never to engage in destructive behavior again.[47] Though he later recalled the inner struggle he had before bending his knees to pray,[48] Little soon became a member of the Nation of Islam,[47] maintaining a regular correspondence with Muhammad.[49]

"Between Mr. Muhammad's teachings, my cor­re­spond­ence, my vis­i­tors ... and my reading of books, months passed without my even thinking about being impris­oned. In fact, up to then, I had never been so truly free in my life."
—Malcolm X[37]

In 1950, the FBI opened a file on Little after he wrote a letter from prison to President Truman expressing opposition to the Korean War and declaring himself a Communist.[50] That year, Little also began signing his name "Malcolm X".[51] Muhammad instructed his followers to leave their family names behind when they joined the Nation of Islam and use "X" instead. When the time was right, after they had proven their sincerity, he said, he would reveal the Muslim's "original name".[52] In his autobiography, Malcolm X explained that the "X" symbolized the true African family name that he could never know. "For me, my 'X' replaced the white slavemaster name of 'Little' which some blue-eyed devil named Little had imposed upon my paternal forebears."[53]"

He said upon hearing the message from his brother, Reginald, he was nearly struck dumb. I can see how his whole life can be explained by white devils. The white people who terrorized his family, the white foster families and teachers who discouraged him and fed him negativity, the whites using Harlem as entertainment and exploitation, the prison system that sentenced him harshly for racially motivated reasons. His whole life was dominated, oppressed, and influenced by race. He became activated within the Nation of Islam and believed black people were the original people, the chosen people, superior. He believed white people were literally bred to be devils, a plague on the black race. He was a black nationalist, a segregationist. He didn't believe whites and blacks could ever integrate. Soooo, that's pretty extremist, dude. I can see many people hearing that conclusion and getting scared without looking deeper.

Interesting notes:
He says his education came about like this: he began reading with the influence of another prisoner, but after being activated he read voraciously and up to 16 hours per day. He reports sleeping for only 3-4 hours per night, spending the rest of his time reading. With reading and studying, he went weeks not realizing he was in prison. His writing had degraded without practice, so he spent hours rewriting words from the dictionary over and over. He would write and re-write letters, striving to get better. He did this for years in prison. He joined a debate program within the prison. Oh, he got lucky in getting transferred to a really nice prison which focused on reforming inmates. He read philosophy and related Nietzsche and similar philosopher to "so-called intellectual negroes" who were all talk and no action. He spoke highly of Chinese philosophers like Confucius. He studied anthropology texts to learn about African history and felt most other sources were tainted. He gave the impression of being well read in depth and breadth. When asked what university he attended, he replied, "books."

After prison, he managed his life by time. He held onto a few things, clothes, his watch, and a book. He drove by his watch, not his speedometer. Whenever he had a free moment, he was reading.

[His younger brother, Reginald Little](https://www.shmoop.com/the-autobiography-of-malcolm-x/reginald-little.html)

"Character Analysis

Malcolm X has so many brothers and sisters that we can't even remember most of their names. And those are just his full siblings, so don't even get us started on his half brothers and sisters. So what makes Reginald special?

**Lil' Malcolm**
Reginald is the stereotypical little brother. He follows Malcolm around; copying everything he does like a puppy. When Malcolm moves to Harlem, Reginald moves to Harlem. When Malcolm starts hustling, Reginald starts hustling.

It's actually cute because Malcolm tries his best to be a good big brother to Reginald. That shows us that even in his drug dealing days, Malcolm is not totally bad. He still has some sense of decency.

Back to Reginald. Even though he tags after Malcolm, Reginald isn't just a Malcolm clone. He has a mind of his own.

While Malcolm does dangerous jobs to get his money, Reginald's job is totally legal. Not only that, but he doesn't chase around white women who are not looking for serious relationships. Instead he finds himself an older black woman who is basically willing to be his sugar mama. Malcolm is impressed. He says:

That was just another example of why my respect for my younger brother kept increasing. Reginald showed, in often surprising ways, more sense than a lot of working hustlers twice his age. Reginald then was only sixteen, but, a six-footer, he looked and acted much older than his years. (7.23)

The point of hustling is to get money, right? Well, Reginald was smart enough to figure out a way to get money without having to put himself in danger.

One way that you might think about Reginald is as if he were Malcolm in an alternate timeline. Instead of getting deeper and deeper into drugs and crime, Reginald takes the same situation that Malcolm is in and turns it into a safe and cushy relationship with an older woman. Sometimes it seems inevitable that Malcolm went down the path he did, but Reginald reminds us that there were other choices he could have made.

But unfortunately, even Reginald's story doesn't have a happy ending.

**Bros Before… Islam?**

We said before that Reginald is the stereotypical little brother, but we didn't say that Malcolm is the stereotypical big brother. Normally big brothers are totally annoyed by their little siblings, but Reginald is one of the most important people in Malcolm's life.

If it weren’t for him, Malcolm probably would have never converted to the Nation of Islam. He only listened because of his respect for Reginald. When another brother, Philbert, tried to convert him, Malcolm just cussed him out.

So when Reginald is kicked out of the Nation of Islam for improper behavior, whose side do you think Malcolm takes? If you thought he stood up for his little brother, you were wrong. This is how he treats him:

The last time I had seen Reginald, one day he walked into the Mosque Seven restaurant. I saw him coming in the door. I went and met him. I looked into my own brother's eyes; I told him he wasn't welcome among Muslims, and he turned around and left, and I haven't seen him since. I did that to my own blood brother because, years before, Mr. Muhammad had sentenced Reginald to "isolation" from all other Muslims—and I considered that I was a Muslim before I was Reginald's brother. (16.40)

Despite all they have done for one another, and all they have been through together, Malcolm is quick to kick Reginald to the curb. He decides that his family ties are not as important as his ties to the Nation of Islam.

Reginald doesn't react well to this. Just like Malcolm's mom has a mental breakdown due to the destruction of her family, Reginald loses his sanity when his brothers and sisters reject him for their new religion. He's put in an institution, and that's the last Malcolm sees of him.

This situation tells us about two things: the strength of Malcolm's dedication to the Nation of Islam, and what happens to people who are shunned. Before the Nation of Islam entered his life, Malcolm's most important social group was his family. He would do anything for them. But after he joins the Nation of Islam, his unquestioning loyalty is to Elijah Muhammad. This kind of overzealous devotion does not only apply to Malcolm, but many members of the religion.

Reginald's exclusion from his former social circle is complete. Can you imagine that everyone you ever knew suddenly hates you just because some guy told them to? You might go crazy too if your favorite brother refused to even let you into the same restaurant with other Muslims. The severity of his exclusion sets us up to understand how extreme Malcolm X's exclusion from the Nation of Islam is much later in the book. He goes through the same period of near insanity as his little brother. Only we're pretty sure he never thought he would be on the receiving end of such treatment."

He says in the book he believes Reginald is stricken with mental illness because God is punishing him. It's interesting that Malcolm takes the just-world view of his brother's illness. Malcolm's mother and brother both had serious mental health issues.

---
