---
layout: post
title:  "Sapiens"
permalink: /sapiens/
date:   2019-02-25 21:36:30 -0700
categories: books
---

This past month, I finally listened to an audiobook version of [Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind](https://www.ynharari.com/book/sapiens/) by Professor Yuval Noah Harari that my brother has been recommending to me for quite a while. Sapiens has genuinely changed my life. The first description that comes to mind is _biblical_.


### Timeline of History

Years Before the Present

---
13.5 billion

Matter and energy appear. Beginning of physics. Atoms and molecules appear. Beginning of chemistry.

---
4.5 billion

Formation of planet Earth.

---
3.8 billion

Emergence of organisms. Beginning of biology.

---
6 million

Last common grandmother of humans and chimpanzees.

---
2.5 million

Evolution of the genus Homo in Africa. First stone tools.

---
2 million

Humans spread from Africa to Eurasia. Evolution of different human species.

---
500,000

Neanderthals evolve in Europe and the Middle East.

---
300,000

Daily usage of fire.

---
200,000

Homo sapiens evolves in East Africa.

---
70,000

The Cognitive Revolution. Emergence of fictive language.
Beginning of history. Sapiens spread out of Africa.

---
45,000

Sapiens settle Australia. Extinction of Australian megafauna.

---
30,000

Extinction of Neanderthals.

---
16,000

Sapiens settle America. Extinction of American megafauna.

---
13,000

Extinction of Homo floresiensis. Homo sapiens the only surviving human species.

---
12,000

The Agricultural Revolution. Domestication of plants and animals. Permanent settlements.

---
5,000

First kingdoms, script and money. Polytheistic religions.

---
4,250

First empire – the Akkadian Empire of Sargon.

---
2,500

Invention of coinage – a universal money.
The Persian Empire – a universal political order ‘for the benefit of all humans’.
Buddhism in India – a universal truth ‘to liberate all beings from suffering’.

---
2,000

Han Empire in China. Roman Empire in the Mediterranean. Christianity.

---
1,400

Islam.

---
500

The Scientific Revolution. Humankind admits its ignorance and begins to acquire unprecedented power. Europeans begin to conquer America and the oceans. The entire planet becomes a single historical arena. The rise of capitalism.

---
200

The Industrial Revolution. Family and community are replaced by state and market. Massive extinction of plants and animals.

---
The Present

Humans transcend the boundaries of planet Earth. Nuclear weapons threaten the survival of humankind. Organisms are increasingly shaped by intelligent design rather than natural selection.

---
The Future

Intelligent design becomes the basic principle of life? Homo sapiens is replaced by superhumans?

---

Sapiens begins at the big bang and fast forwards through time to about 2.5 million years ago where it traces homo erectus and the many cousin-species of homo sapiens. What is so impactful to me about this book is how it breaks down the long held hubris of humankind. "They [humans] were insignificant animals, whose ecological impact was less than that of fireflies or jellyfish." With homo sapiens appearing just 0.2 million years ago, we likely held a niche spot in the ecosystem similar to the woodpecker. Just like the woodpecker evolved to eat grubs by hammering through dense bark, we might have evolved to eat bone marrow. When an apex predator such as a tiger killed a giraffe, early humans watched as the tiger and pride ate most of the giraffe. Then the hyenas came to eat the remaining parts. Finally, early humans, after looking all around for predators, slunk towards the carcass to eat any remaining tissue and use stone tools to break bones and eat the marrow. That was our niche.

However, for 2 million years from homo erectus to homo sapiens, our brains just kept growing. We are still unsure as the reason why. With the domestication of fire, humans could scare away beasts, keep themselves warm, cook food, and control their environment. One human could easily burn down a forest in a matter of 20 minutes. How did humans control themselves not to destroy everything? Humans learned to do controlled burning which allowed them to pick through charred meat and other foods in the aftermath of a fire.

Of course, cooking food allowed our bodies to absorb the nutrients better. This hints at what was to come, humans getting more resources from the same amount of food or land when compared to other species.

70,000 years ago began the cognitive revolution which Harari defines as the moment when sapiens began to invade and dominate diverse ecosystems. For the first time in history we know of, a single species with a similar set of DNA successfully adapted itself all across the world. This was not due to slow evolutionary processes but through cognitive abilities.

The two key characteristics which define human species are our large brains and walking upright. Why are giant brains so rare in the animal kingdom? Brains are hard to carry around and even harder to fuel. "In _Homo sapiens_, the brain accounts for about 2-3 per cent of total body weight, but it consumes 25 per cent of the body's energy when the body is at rest. By comparison, the brains of other apes require only 8 per cent of rest-time energy. Archaic humans paid for their large brains in two ways. Firstly, they spent more time in search of food. Secondly, their muscles atrophied," page 9.

"For more than 2 million years, human neural networks kept growing and growing, but apart from some flint knives and pointed sticks, humans had precious little to show for it. What then drove forward the evolution of the massive human brain during those 2 million years? Frankly, we don't know," page 9.

For much of that time, we lived in tribes, bands of sapiens up to 150, hunting and foraging in up to 1,000 square miles of land. Humans lived and died like this. Their work hours were less than that of farmers, and they likely lead healthier, happier lives. Their diverse diet meant they had almost no nutritional deficiencies. It's difficult to imagine the level of integration human beings had with their environment. All the years we today spend at work or in school were then spent living in their area with their community. Early humans learned seasons, cycles, plants, animals, and the myriad survival skills needed. They had to remember where mushrooms were growing and at what time of season. A mistake could mean death or starvation. They likely had dexterity beyond the capabilities of today's most elite athletes.



Aside from the use of fire, sapiens evolved an extremely versatile tool, not language, but myths. Chimpanzees have language. There are calls which mean, "careful - an eagle!" and "careful - a tiger!" When these phrases are recorded and played for other chimps, they scatter and look for cover. This kind of language is immediate and real. Sapiens however can believe in things which are not present or even real.

"Homo sapiens rules the world because it is the only animal that can believe in things that exist purely in its own imagination, such as gods, states, money and human rights," [source](https://www.ynharari.com/book/sapiens/).

Neanderthals most likely didn't have the linguistic capabilities sapiens had. They had complex social structures, took care of their young, old, and infirm, and were probably strikingly familiar to us in many ways. They were resistant to the cold in ways we weren't, but we probably couldn't convince them of our religion and myths. The more extraordinary aspect of humans is that we found a way to convince humans beyond our local tribe to work together. Chimps are socially very similar to us, but if you put 1,000 chimps into a smaller area there would be havoc. The chimps would form small bands and likely attack each other in pandemonium. However, sapiens routinely gather in such numbers and many more, acting in coordinated ways.

As sapiens moved into Neanderthals' territory, we began to compete with their food supplies. While getting several dozen members of Neanderthals together to fight could be achieved, sapiens could simply gather more sapiens and outnumber them. Even among sapiens, a well organized army almost always overtakes a disorganized band.

Considering that all sapiens are the same species but often kill each other over minor differences in belief, such as catholics and protestants, hominids that looked human but couldn't interact acceptably must have seemed quite eerie. Similar to the [uncanny valley](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uncanny_valley), sapiens could have killed or pushed away other hominids for this reason. However, there is evidence for some sapien cross-breeding with neanderthals.

Eventually, sapiens traced no lineage to primates and saw themselves as separate from the animal kingdom. Many sapiens believed there was something divinely special about humans.

The agricultural revolution began only 12,000 years ago.

The Sumerian invention of writing and money 5,000 years ago released societies from the limited data processing of human brains.

---
### The summary provided by [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sapiens:_A_Brief_History_of_Humankind)

Harari's work situates its account of human history within a framework provided by the natural sciences, particularly evolutionary biology: he sees biology as setting the limits of possibility for human activity, and sees culture as shaping what happens within those bounds. The academic discipline of history is the account of cultural change.

Harari surveys the history of humankind from the evolution of archaic human species in the Stone Age up to the twenty-first century, focusing on Homo sapiens. He divides the history of Sapiens into four major parts:

1. The Cognitive Revolution (c. 70,000 BCE, when Sapiens evolved imagination).
2. The Agricultural Revolution (c. 10,000 BCE, the development of agriculture).
3. The unification of humankind (the gradual consolidation of human political organisations towards one global empire).
4. The Scientific Revolution (c. 1500 CE, the emergence of objective science).

Harari's main argument is that Sapiens came to dominate the world because it is the only animal that can cooperate flexibly in large numbers. He argues that prehistoric Sapiens were a key cause of the extinction of other human species such as the Neanderthals, along with numerous other megafauna. He further argues that the ability of Sapiens to cooperate in large numbers arises from its unique capacity to believe in things existing purely in the imagination, such as gods, nations, money, and human rights. He argues that these beliefs give rise to discrimination- whether that be racial,sexual or political and it is potentially impossible to have a completely unbiased society. Harari claims that all large-scale human cooperation systems – including religions, political structures, trade networks, and legal institutions – owe their emergence to Sapiens' distinctive cognitive capacity for fiction. Accordingly, Harari regards money as a system of mutual trust and sees political and economic systems as more or less identical with religions.

Harari's key claim regarding the Agricultural Revolution is that while it promoted population growth for Sapiens and co-evolving species like wheat and cows, it made the lives of most individuals (and animals) worse than they had been when Sapiens were mostly hunter-gatherers, since their diet and daily lives became significantly less varied. Humans' violent treatment of other animals is indeed a theme that runs throughout the book.

In discussing the unification of humankind, Harari argues that over its history, the trend for Sapiens has increasingly been towards political and economic interdependence. For centuries, the majority of humans have lived in empires, and capitalist globalization is effectively producing one, global empire. Harari argues that money, empires, and universal religions are the principal drivers of this process.

Harari sees the Scientific Revolution as founded on innovation in European thought, whereby elites became willing to admit to, and hence to try to remedy, their ignorance. He sees this as one driver of early modern European imperialism and of the current convergence of human cultures. Harari also emphasises the lack of research into the history of happiness, positing that people today are not significantly happier than in past eras. He concludes by considering how modern technology may soon end the species as we know it, as it ushers in genetic engineering, immortality, and non-organic life. Humans have, in Harari's chosen metaphor, become gods: they can create species.

Harari cites Jared Diamond's Guns, Germs, and Steel (1997) as one of the greatest inspirations for the book by showing that it was possible to "ask very big questions and answer them scientifically".
