---
layout: post
title:  Mate
permalink: /mate/
date:   2020-06-04
categories: books
---

A friend recommended the book _mate: become the man women want_, and I skimmed/read through it. I liked the perspective compared to other books. The authors, Tucker Max and Geoffrey Miller Ph.D, are writing the book they wish they had at 17 years old. Here are some of the notes.

### Attractive traits:

- Get in Shape (Physical health trait)
- Get Happy (Mental health trait)
- Smarten Up (Intelligence trait)
- Get Your Life Together (Willpower trait)
- Tender Defender (Agreeableness and Assertiveness trait)

### Displaying Attractive Proofs:

- Popularity and Prestige (Social proof)
- Wealth (Material proof)
- Style (Aesthetic proof)
- Flirting (Romantic proof)

### Mating Markets

This section was interesting, but it makes sense. Women tend to compare men in a local space. You're compared to the potential mates around you. You want to look for markets where you can display your strengths, minimize your weaknesses, and go where the women with the attractive traits you want are. They argue people tend to pair off according to their value in their respective mating market.

On page 278 under the section _The Purpose of Conversation_, they argue, "In mating situations, the purpose of conversation is to indirectly signal your underlying traits and begin the process of connection to the other person." What makes mating conversation so different is the indirectness.

### Your Mating Plan

1. Clarify Your Mating Goal
2. Highlight Your Attractive Traits and Work on Your Weak Ones
3. Mating Market: Find the Places and Groups That Fit You
4. Start Small, Get Wins, and Build on Them
5. Focus on Social Life and Fun
6. Try, Learn, Repeat

---

I really liked [The Science of Flirting: Being a H.O.T. A.P.E. by Jean Smith](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5cQoGNEcc5Q). "The basis of Jeans teachings comes from her background as a social anthropologist.. A few years ago, Jean published, The Flirt Interpreter, which is an accessible analysis of the research she conducted into the flirting behaviour of people in the cities of London, New York, Paris and Stockholm. She conducted 250 face-to-face interviews to ascertain flirting behaviour."

- H - Humor
- O - Openness
- T - Touch
- A - Attention
- P - Proximity
- E - Eye contact

Simple, repeatable, clear signals.

---
